Cavity Tuning
=============

The tuning module adjusts a selected geometric parameter of the cavity cells to converge on a specified target frequency. This is essential when designing cavities that must operate at an exact frequency (e.g. 1300 MHz for the TESLA/ILC standard) before evaluating final RF properties.

The algorithm iteratively modifies the chosen variable (typically the equator radius :math:`R_{\text{eq}}`), re-runs the eigenmode solver at each step, and uses a root-finding procedure to home in on the target :math:`\pi`-mode frequency.

Interface
*********
To run tuning:

.. code-block:: python

    cavs.run_tune(tune_config)

Or for a single cavity:

.. code-block:: python

    tesla.run_tune(tune_config)

Configuration Dictionary
************************
The tuning process is controlled by a configuration dictionary:

.. code-block:: python

    tune_config = {
        'freqs': 1300,
        'cell_type': {'mid-cell': 'Req'},
        'processes': 1,
        'rerun': True
    }

Settings description:

``freqs``
   *(float or list)* Target frequency in MHz. For multiple cavities, pass a list of target frequencies matching the number of loaded cavities.

``cell_type``
   *(dict)* Maps each cell block to the geometric variable to adjust. The key selects the cell block:

   - ``'mid-cell'`` — the repeating interior cells,
   - ``'end-cell'`` — the outer end cells (``'end-cell-left'`` / ``'end-cell-right'`` address one end),
   - ``'single-cell'`` — the sole cell of a one-cell cavity.

   The value selects the geometric variable, typically ``'Req'`` (equator radius) for elliptical cells, but any handle the model declares works — ``'A'``, ``'B'``, ``'L'`` for elliptical cells, ``'Req'`` for a pillbox, ``'R6'`` for the RF gun, or a spline control-point coordinate such as ``'p2_r'``. The value may also be a **list** of handles to tune in sequence.

   Scheduling several cell types in one call runs them **in order**, so later stages see the earlier ones already tuned:

   .. code-block:: python

       'cell_type': {'mid-cell': 'Req', 'end-cell': 'L'}

   Each model declares its own handles — the tuner asks the model rather than assuming a fixed list. See :doc:`examples/tuning/cavity_types` for the same call driving four different geometries.

Multicell cavities
******************
In a multicell cavity the operating mode is the :math:`\pi`-mode of the fundamental passband. Two things set it:

- The **interior (mid) cells** fix the passband through their shared equator radius ``Req``. Tuning the mid cell places the :math:`\pi`-mode.
- The **end cells** are detuned by the beam pipes. Left uncorrected they are under-excited, so the field is not flat. Tuning them **independently** — usually through the end-cell half-length ``L`` — restores field flatness and pins the :math:`\pi`-mode on target.

Both jobs are done in one call by scheduling ``'mid-cell'`` and ``'end-cell'`` together. The tuned mid and end parameters are stored on the single tuned cavity, whose :math:`\pi`-mode is the target frequency. See :doc:`examples/tuning/multicell` for the worked two-stage example, including the field-flatness before/after comparison.

``processes``
   *(int, default: 1)* Number of parallel workers when tuning multiple cavities simultaneously.

``rerun``
   *(bool, default: True)* If ``True``, forces a re-run of the tuning calculations even if cached results are found.

Accessing Results
*****************
Once tuning finishes, the tuned geometric variables and final frequencies are stored directly on the cavity:

.. code-block:: python

    # View final tuned parameters for a cavity
    tuned_qois = tesla.tune.qois
    pp.pprint(tuned_qois)

.. tip::

   Tuning is automatically integrated into the optimisation loop (see :doc:`optimisation`). Every candidate geometry generated by the genetic algorithm is tuned to the target frequency before its objectives are evaluated.

Worked examples:

- :doc:`examples/tuning/tune_to_frequency` — a single cell to a target frequency,
- :doc:`examples/tuning/multicell` — mid and end cells of a 9-cell cavity, with field flattening,
- :doc:`examples/tuning/cavity_types` — the same call across elliptical, pillbox, RF-gun and spline geometries.
